+++
title = "Waiting to Exhale"
date = 2021-11-19

[taxonomies]
tags = ["teaching"]
+++

## Waiting to Exhale: A Year of Teaching in a Surgical Mask

My glasses are steaming up again. I can barely see the group of masked students in the shoebox-shaped classroom in front of me and have to pause in mid-sentence, remove my glasses, wipe them off, and then clumsily replace them while trying not to get them caught up in the strings of the surgical mask I'm wearing. I'm already short of breath. Projecting to a room full of people requires larger quantities of air than normal speech, and to speak at the required volume I have to suck in air at a rate faster than the KF94 mask comfortably allows. As I inhale, the white mask contracts against my face, then billows out again like a sail as I speak. There are moments when I'm almost literally gasping for breath. When one of my students speaks, I'm distracted by watching his mask expanding and contracting against his face, reminding me of the ballooning respirators above patients' beds in hospitals. As soon as class is over and I get outside, I rip the mask off and gulp in the fresh evening air, feeling my body relaxing. But my head still aches from not having been able to breathe properly for the past hour and three quarters, something I noticed a while ago. The headaches have been getting worse lately; it isn't clear how far the effect is the result of oxygen starvation and how far it's from the stress of trying to teach for almost two hours while wearing a surgical mask. I remind myself that I need to step out for a minute or two when we take a break, not to go to the bathroom or drink some water, but just to take a few deep breaths - literally to get some air. This is teaching under a pandemic.

This has been going on for more than a year now. As the working-from-home supervisors and administrators tirelessly remind us, in the already time-honored cliche, this is "the new normal." In fall of 2020, in the midst of a global pandemic, as many colleges around the country were forced to shift to online-only teaching, the college in the U.S. north east where I teach decided to make a go of it and scheduled in-person classes as usual - albeit for adjuncts like me - with the by now familiar litany of precautions: weekly testing, compulsory masking, physical distancing, Purell dispensers, disinfectant wipes. The first course I taught was in a large performance space, with students spaced out at least six feet apart. The second course was in a full-sized theatrical auditorium, with about twenty students spaced out among the banked seating like the isolated spectators in a porn movie theater. Both rooms had microphones at the main media console, which which at least made it easier to make myself heard without having to suck in enough air after one sentence to be able to move on to the next. But there were also drawbacks. Like many college professors, I like to move around while I'm teaching, pacing up and down, approaching a student while they're speaking, walking over to the projection screen to point out a detail, and so on. Walking around while teaching helps me to think on my feet, and it makes the class more dynamic and animated. In this case, the fixed microphones meant that I had to remain in front of them or at the podium at all times, enforcing a lecture format and preventing interaction with my class. Moreover, the enforced physical separation of masked students from one other prevented any interaction between them. Under these conditions, changing things up with in-class group or even pair assignments to limit the monotony of the lecture + Q&A format was not an option. When students themselves were given the opportunity to lead the class in presentations while wearing masks, they came up against the same problems I was having. In the past, I could always tell when a course was going well by the hubbub of conversation between students when I entered the room and after the class ended, and when students would hang around afterwards to continue the conversation. Now entering the classroom feels like more like entering a library or a doctor's waiting room, as students sit silently staring at the screens of their laptops or tapping out text messages on their phones.

In spring semester, one of my courses was scheduled in the same auditorium, repeating the problems of the fall. The movie theater's large screen at least made it possible to show film excerpts as I would have liked to, but the theatrical setting again enforced the screening + Q&A format rather than the dynamic, interactive experience of a classroom. My other course was fully online via Zoom, and even though remote proved to be in many ways a far more rewarding experience than the in-person courses had been: being finally able to teach without wearing a mask was a literal breath of fresh air, enabling me to be far more animated than I'd been throughout the previous semester. Most importantly, I could finally see my students' own faces again, and of course they could see mine.

Before the pandemic required us to teach and take entire classes with only our eyes showing, I'd never understood the importance of seeing the expressions and reactions on my students' faces when I'm teaching. Whether smiling or even laughing at a joke I'm cracking, looking puzzled or quizzical at a point I'm making, or grimacing at being reminded of an impending deadline, I realized how dependent I am on that communicative feedback loop that in other contexts, any stage actor or stand-up comic is equally dependent on. Seeing a class light up or, on those rare moments, burst out laughing at something I've said, is one of those rare pleasures that can make it all seem worthwhile. One of the worst things about teaching to a roomful of people wearing surgical masks is that I can't see people smiling anymore, making any attempt at humor practically impossible. In a class about VR technologies the other day, to start the discussion I began by screening a hilarious Icelandic spoof of Mark Zuckerberg's excruciating recent promotion of Facebook's rebranding as Meta and his widely-ridiculed concept of the Metaverse. It's a well-executed and highly amusing video, but there was no laughter and after it ended the class sat impassively. I initially assumed that it must be because people hadn't seen the original video so weren't in on the joke, but it turned out that a good number of people in the class had in fact seen it; I just wasn't able to see them smiling - or, indeed, any reaction at all.

Under these conditions, I was not altogether surprised, albeit no less dismayed, when at the end of the Covid academic year my department chair pointed out that my teaching evaluations for the previous fall semester had been suboptimal. Reading them was a painful but instructive experience, with frequent allusions to the format of "boring lectures." I acknowledged the problem and expressed my resolve to rethink my approach and do  better in the fall.

This fall, with a national vaccination program since last spring beginning to show some effect in terms of bringing infection rates under at least limited control, my college was quite gung-ho in announcing that it would be returning to in-person teaching in the upcoming semester, albeit with the same rigorous regime that it had enforced over the previous year: to maintain an infection-free "bubble" while on campus, all students and faculty were required to wear masks at all times in buildings, to take regular tests, to report symptoms daily via a cellphone app, and to quarantine at the slightest sign of infection. Meanwhile senior faculty and administrators continued to work from home via Zoom. Business as usual, then, at least in terms of the new normal.

In contrast to previous semesters, I was only offered one in-person course, but rewrote my syllabus and devoted more time to planning assignments and class preparation than I had done previously, while making more proactive efforts to engage with students both in and out of the classroom. Midway through the semester, I was notified that I wasn't being offered any courses for spring 2022. When I mentioned to a full-time departmental colleague my concern that this might be related to my teaching evaluations from the past year, he told me that full-time faculty had been assured that their evaluations from the so-called Covid year would not be counted in decisions over promotion, given the unusual degree of strain placed both on students and instructors caused by the limitations of teaching in the midst of a pandemic under the conditions described earlier. However, when I was eventually able to speak with my Chair, she confirmed that the primary reason for the  decision not to rehire me had been my evaluations of the past year.  Evidently, giving faculty the benefit of the doubt did not apply in the case of part-timers. When I mentioned this to my department's part-time  faculty union representative, he mentioned that he'd raised the same issue with the President and Associate Provost the previous year, and had reached a verbal agreement that teaching evaluations from the Covid year would not be taken into consideration in decisions over adjunct hiring either. He even went so far as to email the Chair notifying her of the agreement, but when I spoke with her she dismissed it as a misunderstanding and insisted that rehiring decisions were at "the Chair's discretion." She did not, at least, rule out the possibility of my being rehired "at some point in the future."

For the moment, I continue to teach my remaining classes to the best of my abilities and as conscientiously as possible under the same conditions that I've described over the past year, with the now additional burden of a vote of no-confidence from my own department. I just heard through the grapevine that a section of one of the courses I've taught numerous times over the past five years has recently opened up, raising the possibility that I might be offered a course after all. Needless to say, after teaching in a surgical mask for over a year, and the support I've received from my department, I'm not holding my breath.


